we are sitting around in the airport
here in Hmong should the Hong Yun and
China we're actually leaving at the end
of my contract I've just taught for one
full year we just say to university
semesters and it popped into my mind I'm
sorry if you get some noise pollution
you may hear some announcements overhead
but we're sitting right near the airport
that I could actually do a video just
sort of got the structure and procedure
surrounding getting hired at a Chinese
University if you want to teach English
at the university level in China and I
don't know what that entails but for
getting a job and then once you have the
job so just yesterday I was saying to my
my girlfriend Melissa we had a farewell
dinner so at the end of the contract
many of the professor's not all how many
professors came to the network six
professors one two three four about six
some of them okay so a bunch of the
professors took me out for dinner to say
goodbye the students were actually
supposed to meet me at the airport to
say goodbye to me here at the airport at
the gate before I got in the plane to
leave that didn't work out but whatever
the thought that counts and I also
showed my girlfriend just as we were
packing the other day the actual
contract I have and the life insurance
and other benefits have health insurance
life insurance so I just point out that
in general I get paid more than a real
Chinese professor with a PhD like one of
the women we met at the dinner last
night had a PhD and I get really all the
benefits of being a professor okay not
all not all I can't publish articles in
an academic journal here but I get a
surprising number of the benefits of
being a real professor in China just as
an English teacher inside the university
system now reciprocal with that or
conversely or this side of the room I'll
say to what extent is my work at the
same level as a real professor in China
real person with a PhD one of the few
things that bug me here I think I
mentioned to you a couple months ago
babe when my exams are scheduled my
exams were scheduled in normal class
time and not during the exam break right
and I just said why you know it's a real
course I think my students do more work
in my course in I do for a normal
Chinese language course or normal course
the Chinese professor and I said why
shouldn't they have
exam for my classroom instead of just
taking up one of our class let's taking
normal class time now I'm sure they have
their reasons I guess that it's probably
because of their arrangements in terms
of how the exams are and vigil a didn't
scheduled and I might have to cooperate
with with other people by the way so
we're here at this airport were the only
foreigners here you know babe when I was
just outside now some of these women
were actually taking photographs of me
yeah secretively - they didn't ask my
permission sometimes people ask your
permission
Oh secretively yeah people are snapping
pictures of the foreigners we're trying
to be nonchalant okay I guess I mostly
just notice it when people actually ask
me all right cool but if people were
secretly photographing me walk out in
the porch here so there are some ways in
which and that's obviously from the top
down there's some ways in which from the
organizational level on down my course
is not treated as seriously as a real
course taught by a real professor such
chosen out the exams are scheduled it's
also true I don't have to do staff
meetings I don't have to do kind of what
would be a waste of time for me those
kind whether those are I mean some of
the staff meetings here are completely
psychological prep sessions some of them
are completely political and some
combine the two and then some concerned
technical workings about how that what
the department's doing that I couldn't
get you so give an example you remember
grace our friend in the bar friend and
also kind of my boss but a yeah a senior
professor here but she's very friendly
it was one day she had to go to a
meeting it took all day so she was like
late to talk to us or something yeah
because they took her to a graveyard to
see the corpses of heroes who had died
fighting the Japanese right fighting as
the Japanese in World War two or the
sino-japanese war yeah and why did they
do that they did that to try to inspire
the professor's to work harder this
semester right so again a kind of a mix
of like psychological and political like
you know what's what's this meeting
about we're going to you know we're
going to a break good so I don't do I
don't do any of that stuff I think so
there are a couple things to mention
right now 2017 2018 what you wants I
know this girl okay Tim she's oh oh that
guy dropped five play you see
she want me to tell him this guy just
dropped like this all do a good deed
here divisions any losses warning no
Lucci you no need to fight the wolf lie
there you go guy drop 5 by and I point
out them oh I think so right now 2007
2018 it is incredibly easy to get
yourself hired
if you have a bachelor's degree if you
have the basic qualifications if you can
do the paperwork and come over and teach
they have a crisis in being able to hire
foreign teachers I'm not going to
explain why it comes down to paperwork
and legal changes and details are just
not worth explaining it but right now is
an incredibly easy time to get work
semester by semester
obviously they hire on a semester basis
you know it's tied to the academic
calendar so you can't just sign up any
time but it is a really easy time to get
to get a job here thing one they always
want to interview you face to face of
course some of them are gonna be
resigned to interviewing them by Skype
but most the time they do want you to
fly over and it can be face by face
sorry face to face I don't think people
here in general I should expect you to
teach a demo lesson there's no interest
in that which is a difference from Japan
or different from some other cultures
they don't explain to teach cause there
is zero interest on the part of the
professors in observing you teaching
class that's one of the strangest things
here and that can work in your favor
from work against you like I'm proud of
my classes I'd be totally happy if
senior professors came and walk yeah
absolutely but the sense of which can
work against you as let's say a couple
of students complained about the way you
teach class the your boss is the people
in charge they have nothing to compare
that to then they only know what the
student says about you right yeah that
nobody has senior but nobody's going to
nobody's gonna come inspector individual
at your class or watch you teach at no
stage neither at the application stage
hiring stage nor nor during the whole
year of teaching so I mean that's that
strange you can be prepared for that
obviously they do expect you to show up
and teach on day one as if you're
completely prepared they will not give
you any training they will not give you
any instruction they will not give you
any guidance oh I think I mentioned that
in earlier video I they expect you to
show up unpack your suitcase and start
teaching again I was completely fine
with that
but you for example wouldn't have been
sorry so my girlfriend Melissa is not 25
but you know if you had just shown up to
teach you needed you know you needed
some kind of treasure for that's again a
big contrast to the Japanese the big
Japanese are very enthusiastic about
team building and job training and
training on the job and evaluation none
of that happens over you but I think the
main thing the main thing I want to
don't warn people that make this video
is when you're first applying for the
job so they will want you to fly over
and do a face-to-face interview if it's
at all possible those people the people
who interview you initially by email by
Skype and face to face they will be in
the international outreach department of
the university so that Sun is gonna be
called the Foreign Affairs Department or
something like that but the weirdest
thing is those people are gonna be
really friendly and really helpful and
they're gonna be a big part of your life
during this first setup stage and then
they completely disappear and when you
meet them most of them are professors so
you're not expecting that to happen so
like you know I met professor Chen and
professor Lee who you saw last night
yeah those two people work for me at the
beginning because they're in
international affairs Foreign Affairs
what do you want to call it at the
international outreach office so they're
the people who interviewed me and hired
me and they set up the flight you know
for me to fly over and do the interview
and fly back and this kind of stuff
mm-hmm
they did all that fussing and then they
then they were vapor that disappeared
and that's because the responsibility
for me is then handed over to the
English department or possibly to
another department like foreign
languages depending on the arrangement
your University
so for us we actually have yeah foreign
languages and we have ethnic minority
languages from within China we have a
couple of different departments handling
these things sooo I mean there are some
things like that you can you can kind of
watch out for I don't know do you have
anything you want to pop in and say I
mean you'll probably get job offers to
teach English if you have a bachelor's
degree because when I came to visit you
in February right I got offered three
different jobs in a matter of two weeks
that's a point and from what I've
experienced is people are really they're
really gung-ho about making connections
with people so you know if at least here
in mancha you know I don't know about
other places
China I think another place even more so
come on yet it's true yeah like if one
person if one Chinese person knows a
foreigner they're going to tell like
every other person they know that is
interested in learning English or
teaching English that there is an a
foreigner like there was somebody that
you could potentially hire to be a why
would you mention your job offers
included one that was university level
teacher and those there were only two
universities in in dong in mine anyway
so you know like it's not like you could
have had more but yeah that's an
interesting question if we'd been in
Kunming maybe you would have gotten a
bunch of offers from universities maybe
not but the attitudes are having to
change now cuz I remember how it was ten
years ago and definitely even just one
year ago when I was in conveying a lot
of the a lot of the universities coming
pretended as if they had plenty of
foreigners to take on these jobs as if
there were a lot of foreigners competing
for the few jobs teaching at the
university level specifically yeah today
that's definitely not true and that's
gonna be less and less true no I think
it was kind of I don't know why they
were so self-confident even one year ago
and couldn't Ming because I saw the
reality for those teachers were face to
face they were pretty sad sack munch
including a lot of these 65 year old
guys the guys were trying teaching at
the end of their careers you know it no
background so if you want the job the
thing I generally say that I generally
warn people is it's really only worth
doing if you're here to learn Chinese or
if you're here to learn some other
language you might get you know you
could learn Burmese oh dear world here
on the border with Myanmar you could
learn some of the language is nothing
but already language what have you
depending on what part of China Rim but
the educational component of it for you
can be rewarding but no there's
absolutely no sense in which the other
components of it are rewarding enough
neither financially or otherwise I mean
that is fundamentally why it would be so
hard from to get foreigners to come and
teach here if you're down for this job
in mainland China you're better off
doing the same job in Japan in South
Korea in Taiwan obviously in the Western
world in Europe there's just no
compelling argument to do it unless it's
for your own education in terms of
language education but other than that I
just emphasize again you are given all
the benefits of being a real professor
here almost all of them I'm paid more
than my own boss I was earning five
thousand quai a month
my boss a senior professor who'd been a
professor there for ten years
approximately was earning only four that
was a quiet month and I was a little bit
shocked when I first learned that and
otherwise people do really make an
effort whether going out to dinner with
you trying to find other work
opportunities for you trying to set you
up with side hustles with other jobs
outside yeah people do a pretty good job
taking care of you but all of that
relies on one of course you have to have
a BA minimum and you have to speak
Chinese you have to speak enough Chinese
enough Chinese to get by right and if
you don't then this would just be
insanity to come over here and do this
those King without speaking at least
kind of level three Chinese or something
that would really be suicidal it'd be
impossible for you to survive out here
and yeah we felt that the other day we
bumped into two foreigners in downtown
moksha which never happens to there no
foreigners and we were shocked it was
one black guy among white guy they
neither spoke Chinese nor English and we
just thought how do they survive even
one day you know if you can't speak
English of course it's fine if you can
speak Chinese but they couldn't speak
Chinese and they couldn't speak English
yeah and they were wandering around
hopelessly trying to find a money
changer which also doesn't exist in
moksha well she's a small city there's
stuff there are no for it is just there
is no money change right yeah all right
guys so that's it that's my guidance
about that